Use the [latest version of Circos](/software/download/circos/) and read
[Circos best
practices](/documentation/tutorials/reference/best_practices/)—these list
recent important changes and identify sources of common problems.

If you are having trouble, post your issue to the [Circos Google
Group](https://groups.google.com/group/circos-data-visualization) and [include
all files and detailed error logs](/support/support/). Please do not email me
directly unless it is urgent—you are much more likely to receive a timely
reply from the group.

Don't know what question to ask? Read [Points of View: Visualizing Biological
Data](https://www.nature.com/nmeth/journal/v9/n12/full/nmeth.2258.html) by
Bang Wong, myself and invited authors from the [Points of View
series](https://mk.bcgsc.ca/pointsofview).

# 9 — Recipes

## 2\. Link Geometry - Detailed Bezier Control

[Lesson](/documentation/tutorials/recipes/link_geometry/lesson)
[Images](/documentation/tutorials/recipes/link_geometry/images)
[Configuration](/documentation/tutorials/recipes/link_geometry/configuration)

![Circos tutorial image - Link Geometry - Detailed Bezier
Control](/documentation/tutorials/recipes/link_geometry/img/01.png) ![Circos
tutorial image - Link Geometry - Detailed Bezier
Control](/documentation/tutorials/recipes/link_geometry/img/02.png) ![Circos
tutorial image - Link Geometry - Detailed Bezier
Control](/documentation/tutorials/recipes/link_geometry/img/03.png) ![Circos
tutorial image - Link Geometry - Detailed Bezier
Control](/documentation/tutorials/recipes/link_geometry/img/04.png) ![Circos
tutorial image - Link Geometry - Detailed Bezier
Control](/documentation/tutorials/recipes/link_geometry/img/05.png) ![Circos
tutorial image - Link Geometry - Detailed Bezier
Control](/documentation/tutorials/recipes/link_geometry/img/06.png) ![Circos
tutorial image - Link Geometry - Detailed Bezier
Control](/documentation/tutorials/recipes/link_geometry/img/07.png) ![Circos
tutorial image - Link Geometry - Detailed Bezier
Control](/documentation/tutorials/recipes/link_geometry/img/08.png)

